# history

The founding of what is today ISIS is quite closely linked to the career of **Abu Musab al-Zarqawi**. Zarqawi was a **Jordanian** ex-criminal, born in **1966**.  Self-radicalizing in the 1980s, Zarqawi travelled to **Afghanistan** in **1989** to join the anti-Soviet Jihad.

By this time, bin Laden had already founded al-Qaeda (the exact date of its founding is disputed), returned to Afghanistan after being basically kicked out of Sudan (1996) and declared his war against the West (later in 1996,) and carried out the east Africa embassy bombings in 1998. Zarqawi then went back to Afghanistan, this time to meet bin Laden to gain money and support. Thus he founded "**Jama'at al-Tawhid wal-Jihad**", "The Organization of Monotheism and Jihad" in **1999**.

When the US invaded, al-Qaeda, embarrassingly, considering their mission of killing Americans, had no presence in Iraq, the main battlefield against the Americans. When Zarqawi applied for formal membership of his group in al-Qaeda in **2004**, despite serious disagreements about his proposed approach (particularly his willingness for mass-civilian casualties against his sectarian enemies), bin Laden and his deputy Ayman al-Zawahiri accepted Zarqawi's oath of allegiance. And so "Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn", more commonly known as "al-Qaeda in Iraq" (**AQI**) was founded in **2004**, a date you haven't mentioned but equally critical.

Zarqawi is also clearly influenced by apocalyptical notions in Islam and the end times' association with the caliphate. So already in 2004 Zarqawi writes: "Perhaps [AQI would establish the] caliphate according to the prophetic method." US forces killed Zarqawi in June 2006. But the group nonetheless proclaimed itself the "Islamic State in Iraq" in **October 2006**. After Zarqawi's death, the proclaimed leader of this Islamic State was **Abu Umar al-Baghdadi**.

There's not enough space here to go over the history of the Iraq insurgency after this point, but to make a long story short, despite successfully surviving and carrying out some large scale attacks, things did not go very well for the Islamic State in Iraq (ISI)/AQI. Abu Umar al-Baghdadi was killed in **2010** as part of these operations and was succeeded by **Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi**. Bin Laden, for his part, was killed in **2011**.

The connection with Syria dated to at least 2007, if not earlier, as, "according to the U.S. government...85 to 90 percent of the foreign fighters in Iraq had come through Syria. The Islamic State had received many of those fighters and had maintained its facilitation network in Syria...."

In **December 2011**, at the instructions of core al-Qaeda, Baghdadi sent Abu Muhammad al-Jawlani to **Syria** to establish **Jabhat al-Nusra** (JAN) in December 2011. Despite being sent by the Islamic State in Iraq, JAN soon began to play a distinctive and highly independent role in the Syrian conflict. Where ISI was eliminationist towards rivals, JAN was cooperative with other Jihadist groups. After a falling out over these tactical differences, JAN declared its independence from ISI and allegiance to AQ in April 2013. Needless to say this pissed off Baghdadi in his own relation with AQ, to which he was still nominally loyal. AQ rebuffed ISI's appeal, and consequently ISI ignored AQ's ruling. AQ in **February 2014** then renounced all ties with ISI. The result was an enormous split in the Jihadist community between IS and AQ, with the result that IS ended up with a huge number of fighters loyal to it in Syria, thus ISIS.
 
 
